
1
Home
Following
Answer
Spaces
Notifications
Search Quora
Profile photo for Amha Kindu
Matrix Computations
Matrices (mathematics)
Proofs (mathematics)
Linear Algebra
Algebra
Linear Algebra: How do I prove that if a matrix squared equals itself, its determinant equals either 1 or 0?
Ad by Chegg Study®
Study time, crunch time, anytime.
Access over 55 million Textbook Solutions and Expert Q&A, plus step-by-step walk-throughs.
5 Answers
Profile photo for Barak Shoshany
Barak Shoshany
, Assistant Professor of Physics at Brock University
Answered March 11, 2014 · Upvoted by 
Justin Rising
, PhD in statistics and 
Ricky Kwok
, Ph.D. in Applied Math from UC Davis
Originally Answered: How do I prove that if a matrix squared equals itself, it equals either 1 or 0?
Original question was "How do I prove that if a matrix squared equals itself, it equals either 1 or 0?", and my answer was:

You can't prove it, because it isn't true. Here's a counterexample:
(12121212)2=(12121212)

After the OP said he meant the determinant, my answer was changed to:

Let |A| be the determinant of the matrix A. Then since products of determinants obey the relation |AB|=|A||B|, we have:
A2=A\Rightarr… 
More
2 comments from 
Anonymous
 and more
Sponsored by Jira Software, Atlassian
How do Airbnb, Cisco and Spotify ship software early and often?
Plan, track work, and release great software with Jira. Start your free trial today.
Profile photo for Jay Wacker
Jay Wacker
, uses linear algebra frequently
Answered February 28, 2019
There is a theorem that is more-or-less proven in Joseph Triscari's answer that the spectrum (meaning the set of possible) of eigenvalues of an operator are the roots of the simplest polynomial equation that the operator satisfies.

In this case you have P^2 = P. The roots to this polynomial equation are 0 and 1. This means that the only possible eigenvalues of this operator are 0 or 1.

The determinant is the product of eigenvalues. So the possible determinants all the possible products of 0 and 1. This turns out to be very easy in this case: 1 if all the entries are 1 or 0 if any one of the eige… 
More
2 comments from 
Juspreet-Singh Sandhu
 and more
Profile photo for Joseph Triscari
Joseph Triscari
, Ph.D. from University of Arizona (2000)
Answered February 23, 2019
If P2=P and u is an eigenvector with associated eigenvalue, λ, then λu=Pu=P2u=λ2u. Soλ2=λ. This means all the eigenvalues are either 1 or 0. The determinant of a matrix is equal to the product of its eigenvalues, so the determinant is 1 or 0.

944 viewsView 5 upvotes
2 comments from 
William Jeffries
 and more
Sponsored by Forge of Empires
Can you solve this equation in under 20 seconds?
If so, you are likely to be in the top 5% of players in this award-winning strategic city building game.
Related Questions
More Answers Below
Can there be a non zero matrix whose square is zero matrix?
What does it mean to square a matrix?
How do you square a matrix?
Profile photo for Jonas Renan
Jonas Renan
, Math Student
Answered March 11, 2014 · Upvoted by 
Vinay Madhusudanan
, Ph.D student in Mathematics from Manipal Institute of Technology; Mathematics lecturer at Manipal Institute o…
Originally Answered: How do I prove that if a matrix squared equals itself, its determinant equals either 1 or 0?
Lets assume detM is not zero, Therefore M is invertible so that M^2 = M => M = Id and detM=1

So, the only two possibilities are detM=0 or detM=1

4.1K viewsView 4 upvotes
1 comment from 
Tom McNamara
Profile photo for Ted Hopp
Ted Hopp
, Software developer
Answered March 11, 2014 · Upvoted by 
Ron Lessnick
, BSEE and MS Electrical Engineering & Mathematics, City College of New York (1965)
Originally Answered: How do I prove that if a matrix squared equals itself, its determinant equals either 1 or 0?
It's an established theorem (see Determinant of Matrix Product at ProofWiki, for example) that if A and B are square matrices, then det(AB)=det(A)det(B). So if A=B=AB, then we have det(A)=det(A)2. The only solutions to x=x2 are 0 and 1.

5.2K viewsView 4 upvotes
Profile photo for Amha Kindu

4 answers collapsed (Why?)
Related Questions
Can there be a non zero matrix whose square is zero matrix?
What does it mean to square a matrix?
How do you square a matrix?
When square of any matrix is zero then is it necessary that it is null matrix?
For any non-zero matrix A, is ATA always invertible? If so, why?
I multiply a matrix by itself repeatedly. As I am increasing the power, I want all of its elements to oscillate in a certain range (not converge to a number nor diverge into infinity). What are the properties of such a matrix? How do I construct it?
What is the value of zero power of a matrix?
When is the product of two non-zero matrices equal to a zero matrix?
Why is the determinant of a zero matrix of size n equal to 1?
What are linearly independent vectors?
How do I prove that (AB)T=BTAT for matrices A,B?
What is special about the matrices AAT and ATA? Why do they show up in things like least squares and SVD? I would like an intuitive or geometric interpretation of why these matrices and their eigenvalues and eigenvectors accomplish what they do.
Is it possible for a matrix to equal its own inverse?
What is the dimension of a vector space spanned by (1, 1, -2), (1, 2, -3), (0, 1, -1)?
What is the general argument for why the determinant of a matrix is equal to the determinant of its transpose?
Related Questions
Can there be a non zero matrix whose square is zero matrix?
What does it mean to square a matrix?
How do you square a matrix?
When square of any matrix is zero then is it necessary that it is null matrix?
For any non-zero matrix A, is ATA always invertible? If so, why?
I multiply a matrix by itself repeatedly. As I am increasing the power, I want all of its elements to oscillate in a certain range (not converge to a number nor diverge into infinity). What are the properties of such a matrix? How do I construct it?
Ask question


No messages
Connect with others on Quora by beginning a new conversation.
